and this talk is entitled once around
the methuselah star
so the methuselah star or hd 140
283 to give it its catalogue number
is a rather unimpressive looking
star 190 light years away from earth so
relatively close by
actually in cosmic terms and
it's named in reference to the biblical
uh character methuselah
who reportedly lived to an age of 969
years
and that's because this is the oldest
star
known to exist
you can actually go and find it
it's in the constellation of libra just
on the boundary between libra
and off yucas and it has a magnitude of
7.2 so it's
just below visual magnitude um
marked with the little red cross there
so just above antares and the nose of
scorpio here
here we have libra um just here so it's
possible to go and track this one down
it's not so faint that you won't be able
to see it with binoculars or a small
telescope
just in case you're interested
now one of the things that drew people's
attention to this
uh rather faint looking star was that
it was measured to be um moving across
the sky
quite rapidly but since uh
that measurement in 1912 by uh
adams we've also measured the doppler
shift on it
and spectroscopically determined that
it's
coming towards us very rapidly as well
so it's both moving across the line of
sight
and in our direction with a blue shift
so a very high velocity star relative to
the
movement of the sun which is rather
unusual
and the the proper motions not as great
as that of um
stars like uh barnard star but still
quite an impressive amount
and that led people to think that
perhaps it was a nearby star so
they measured the parallax using the
earth's orbit
as a baseline you can triangulate nearby
stars against the apparent non-moving
very distant ones and see how the two
lines of sight change
and from the angle if you take one over
the angle you get the distance in
parsecs
and a parsec is 3.26 light years
because of the geometry involved so we
can measure the distance to it and found
out that actually it's it's nearby but
it's
not as near as things like barnard's
star at six light years or
proxima centauri at four light years
this one's 190 light years away which
made that
detectable proper motion really quite
impressive
well what do we know about it well it
was born as a
rather unimpressive k type orange dwarf
so smaller than the sun about 80 percent
of the mass
of the sun and such stars are known to
have very very long lifetimes
the lifetime of a star goes inversely
with
its size so the bigger it is despite
that meaning it has more mass and
therefore more fuel to burn
it burns it disproportionately rapidly
so big stars live fast and die young the
largest stars last only a few million
years
the sun is halfway through its life
it's five billion years old it's
probably got about another five billion
years to go
but these smaller
stars these k type dwarfs at
80 percent of the mass of the sun or 60
percent of the mass of the sun even
lasts a lot longer and the red dwarfs
the smallest types of stars can
live for a thousand billion years
so a hundred times longer than the sun
now it's actually it's a very
interesting stage in its development
it is just beginning to turn into a red
giant
so it's neither all the way to being a
red giant nor is it in its pristine
original
orange dwarf state it's now what's
termed a yellow
subgiant so as the fuel is used up as
the hydrogen is converted to helium by
nuclear fusion in the core
gradually more and more of the core
becomes
helium until it really becomes rather
over saturated with it
at which point the fusion in the core
can't work anymore because in the helium
nuclei
take uh 10 times the temperature to get
them to go
and stick together and the hydrogens are
rarely bumping into another hydrogen
they keep pumping into heliums with
which they can't react
so the core becomes an inner
ball of helium and the hydrogen burning
is forced
to uh happen in a shell around it
now the core shrinks
and increases its pressure and
temperature
and the shell around it increases in
in pressure and temperature and to
enable it to support
hydrogen fusion because otherwise
gravity would just carry on crushing it
so it has to burn
in order to not collapse but this
changes the whole balance of forces
and you now have a high pressure
lower temperature burning of hydrogen
going on in the shell
and um this
change in the relative balance between
the mass of the star
and its energy output means that
the balance with gravity is is disturbed
the outer layers of the star swell
outwards because there's a larger
surface area of
outer core shell of hydrogen burning so
the
heat is coming from a larger surface
area and it pushes the outer layer
outwards
and it starts that swelling to become a
red
giant so if i use my mouse pointer the
methuselah stars about here on the
evolutionary scale
it started off as a tiny little star
it's beginning to swell up
it's now twice the diameter of the sun
and it's putting out four times the
power
four times the light and heat and that's
because the overall surface area
is four times as much double the
diameter you get four times the surface
area
and so the amount of light is coming out
in proportion to that and it's not
really cooled down yet it's still
putting out mostly the uh mid wavelength
light
with it with a temperature around about
5900 degrees
it will continue to swell and then the
light output will go up with the
increasing surface area but the overall
temperature
will drop accordingly since their power
output is staying largely the same
and it will then become a red giant
and it's looking at this and the stage
of evolution
of the star that allows us to age it
the luminosity the overall power output
is determined by the
rate of nuclear reactions inside the
core
and the fusion is very very temperature
dependent
the uh i think it goes with the fourth
power of the temperature so a
small increase in the core temperature
gives you a huge improvement in the
amount of fusion that goes on and
likewise
a small drop results in
quite a large reduction in the power
output
and so as the star ages and more helium
is produced building up in the core
diluting the hydrogen and slowing down
the the fusion rate
you can see how the star changes and
evolves
and of course we can also measure the
amount of helium in the outer layer of
the star
so this is a diagram a little movie of
the evolution of a sun-like star so
you can see what happens they swell up
and
grow up to being a red giant really
quite layer enormous in comparison to
their original size
so here we have where the sun is now at
uh
about four and a half billion years from
its formation
and let's run that again
uh it stays more or less the same very
slight
increase in size getting faster and
faster and faster
and the methuselah stars about here just
beginning that final expansion into
becoming
a uh a red giant
now if we look at that in terms of the
hertz sprung russell diagram
the main sequence stars that are burning
hydrogen
are all along this main branch along the
middle here
and where's the sun here's the sun with
a lifetime of 10 billion years
and so the methuselah star was probably
around about here
just sort of at the lower end of the
yellow beginning of the
orange stars at about 80 percent of the
mass of the sun
and you can see the the red dwarfs down
here that live even longer
and what happens is that eventually they
reach the point where they swell up to
become a red giant
and it's interesting that this diagram
for the
milky way shows the giant stars bubbling
away
from this point on the main sequence
here um and that is the sort of average
age of the stars of this
type boiling away and becoming red
giants about
now for most stars the methuselah stars
a little bit
uh ahead of everybody else being born
much earlier
it's going up this direction uh earlier
than
the uh uh most of the stars in the
galaxy
now we've found some other stars of very
very ancient
uh we i think we have about 20 in the
catalogue now that are
as old as the methuselah star or nearly
so
20 of them with ages around 13 billion
years
and most of them are either in the halo
of the outer part of the the milky way
galaxy
or in the bulge the nucleus in the
middle
we've not found any in any other
galaxies
that are known to be of this age because
they'd just be too
faint to see at those distances so
there's a couple of other examples
carol starr at 12 and a half billion
years
and steden's star at 13.
but the methuselah star's age was worked
out
and came in at 14.3
billion years now that's a bit of a
problem
in fact it's a problem we've had before
because in the 1990s
we were estimating the ages of some
stars to be
even older at 18 or even 20 billion
years
and that's a problem because the
universe is thought to be only 13.8
billion years old and how can a
a star possibly be older than the
universe in which it's found
well of course this has gradually been
sorted out and tidied up and our methods
of estimating the ages have been
refined and improved and we're now
getting more sensible ages
for most of the stars and it's really
just the methuselah star
which at 14.25 seems to be
a little bit older than the universe
now what we're really talking about here
is
that big bang occurred back here in time
13.75 or 13.8
billion years ago then we had the cosmic
microwave background
this pattern of radiation was the first
light to be able to travel through the
universe once the universe had cooled
down
and the plasma had turned into a gas
the deionization of the original
plasma and the plasma of course conducts
electricity and therefore blocks
electromagnetic radiation whereas
a neutral gas doesn't and lets it flow
so that
let the light out and we see it as the
cosmic microwave
now because of the enormous redshift
from the subsequent expansion
so that was about 400 000 years after
the big bang
then we had the dark ages where
basically
there was nothing producing any light in
the universe
until the first stars lit up and that
was about
uh half a billion years later
probably but the methuselah star
dating back 14.25 billion
is a problem because clearly there
hasn't been that long
but when we look at the analysis
the estimate is plus or minus
uh about uh 800 million years
so it's probable that it's
uh on the young side of the
range of estimates that are being given
but it's still
very very old indeed dating almost all
the way back
to the first stars possible here
in uh 20 years ago now the hipparcos
satellite
measured the distance to the star and uh
at that point gave an estimate of it
being 16 billion years old as i was
saying
a bit of a headache but the the latest
estimates have been
refined using a rather interesting
technique
with the hubble space telescope as with
many telescopes the hubble space
telescope needs
accurately guiding and it has these
side mounted guide cameras on it
that lock on to stars in the field of
view
and allow the gyroscopes
to do little corrections to keep the
telescope
pointing very very accurately
but there's a library of images from
these guide
telescopes that have got nice long
exposures in them
and scientists from caltech
took these guide images of
lots of different fields of view and
some of them just happened to contain
the methuselah star so they used it to
measure the parallax distance much more
accurately
and come up with 14.27
plus or minus 0.8 billion so
that's enough to cover the potential
deviation there
now this is the periodic table of the
elements
a little bit of chemistry for you and we
colored in
the uh metals in the sort of bluey
silver
color so from lithium onwards all of the
bottom
right hand side very large number of
different metals there
we've got the non-metals so things like
the gases of
chlorine and oxygen and hydrogen and
helium and so on
are colored in brown including some of
the solid
non-metals like carbon nitrogen
phosphorus
and so on
and then we've got the weird
intermediate
half away houses the metalloids
silicon that we use in our computer
chips and so on
all of these here the the metalloids at
least that's the view that chemists take
astronomers are a funny lot
astronomers call everything except
hydrogen and helium
metals as a shorthand form for
all the other stuff of the universe
other than hydrogen and helium
personally as a chemist i
disapprove of this uh abuse of the word
but that's what astronomers do
and they do it because the big bang
made certain elements in its big bang
nucleosynthesis
stage when it created the first elements
in the universe
and this was all worked out by uh
scientist ralph
alpha in the 1940s and published in a
very famous paper
and as a joke he decided he'd better
collaborate
with heinz bathur spelt b-e-t-h-e
and and they also enlisted george gamau
who had nothing to do with it so it's
the alpha beta gamma
paper as everybody calls it there's a
bit of a pun
but it describes how the original
composition of
protons and neutrons underwent three
minutes
of fusion in the early phase of the
first three minutes of the universe
forming deuterium and tritium
and helium-3 and helium-4 by these
nuclear combination reactions that you
see here
so a proton and a neutron combining
and then either um adding a proton to
make helium
to make tritium or going this way adding
a neutron and making a
helium-3 and then from either of those
you can make helium-4
but you could also go on and make two
more elements
a little tiny bit of beryllium-7
and some lithium-7 and the lithium-7
results mostly because the beryllium-7
immediately falls apart by radioactive
processes
and converts itself to lithium so those
were the only elements that were made
in that um uh first three minutes
before the universe cooled enough that
no more fusion could be made
and really there's none of the beryllium
left because it all turns
to lithium and there's not much of the
lithium left either a very very tiny
amount
now that's very interesting because it
allows us to
look at the metal content
using the that word um of
different stars and the sun
is what we call a population one star
and that means it's the most recent
class of stars that have formed
in the latter stages of the universe
from our point of view
and that the sun contains
73.81 hydrogen
24.85 helium and that leaves
everything else all the heavier elements
from lithium onwards
to just 1.34
so not very much of the other stuff
but of course all that other stuff was
made
by earlier generations of stars
only the hydrogen and the helium were in
uh evidence after the big bang almost
nothing of anything else
so here's a good example of a young star
a population one star other than the sun
and that's rigel
the very bright blue supergiant
burning away gonna have a very short
life of just eight million years
lighting up the witch's face nebula next
to it here a
rather nice object um and this
being born in the last eight million
years so very recent indeed
the uh proportion of those metals those
heavier elements than helium
is now up to six percent in this star
uh showing how the universe is gradually
getting uh more and more contaminated
as time goes on with these heavier
elements
and rigel contains a full mix of all the
elements that we know about
all the naturally occurring ones anyway
so they're all detectable
now if we look at older stars like the
methuselah star we find them
as i said in either the bulge or
scattered around the halo
or perhaps in some of the globular
clusters
and really they ought to be classed into
two different groups
in the bulge they have uh
fewer of those heavy metals they uh
well not so heavy lithium onwards i'm
going to call them metals it goes
against the grain as a chemist to do so
but
that they have only point one percent
non-hydrogen and helium so uh
13 times less than the sun
and 60 times less than a young star like
rigel
but in the halo and the globular
clusters it's an even tinier fraction
at 0.001 and so really those should be
the young population 2 in the old
population
2 stars
now rather interestingly when you do
look at what elements they do contain
in that tiny fraction that's not
hydrogen and helium
you find that they contain uh pretty
much
only the even numbered elements
and this uh also is a clue to their
very ancient nature and their origin
very early on in the universe
i'll explain why the reason for the
even numbered uh elements being
predominant
is because of what happens after
the hydrogen to helium fusion stage
what you get is the first step is for
hydrogen to make helium
the second step three three heliums go
on to make
carbon and then you get repeated
addition of helium to give all the even
numbered elements
leading up to nickel so carbon plus
another helium
makes oxygen and they're even numbered
because
helium is number two and carbon is made
of three of those so it's number six
and it gives you element eight which is
oxygen oxygen plus two makes
element ten neon ten plus two makes
magnesium at 12
and so on all the way down to number 28
at nickel it's also illustrated in this
diagram here
of the different stages of fusion that
go on inside
stars and this is the predominant
ladder by which we get the uh
more massive elements formed
inside the cores of giant stars
it also happens inside exploding
type 2 supernovae when giant stars come
to the end of their life
and blow up a process called the s
process s for slow um goes on
which also tends to synthesize more
of those uh even numbered elements by
more or less the same method of adding a
helium
nucleus to create heavier and heavier
ones
and it's the s process builds quite a
few of the
elements beyond nickel
up to some of the radioactive ones
during the
fireball of a supernova so that's where
they come from
but what about the odd numbered elements
well
they are mostly the result of other
processes
and in particular they come from type 1a
supernovae exploding white dwarf stars
where as in the diagram here a white
dwarf star has formed in a binary with
its companion
um the white dwarf star would have been
a larger star and evolved more quickly
through the red giant stage
down to being a white dwarf and its
companion is now catching up
and forming a red giant
that has relatively weak grip on its
outer layers
and some of the material then gets
pulled across and spirals onto the white
dwarf
taking it over the 1.44 solar mass
size limit for a white dwarf the
chandrasekhar limits
at which point the star explodes as a
type 1a supernova
and when these stars explode they create
a
bombardment of neutrons and the neutrons
create all the odd numbered elements
by the r process the rapid process
and this is as shown in these two
diagrams
here we have a number of
nuclear particles and the charge so the
element number goes this way so we've
got silver
cadmium indium tin and antimony
in these sort of mid-range elements and
what happens is that a silver nucleus
gets hit by
a neutron and steps to the right
that makes it one step heavier
but it's then radioactive so it decays
back turning a neutron into a proton
so it goes back to here and forms
cadmium and then you can climb along
creating quite a few different isotopes
of cadmium
before it happens again so you get this
zigzag pattern
and it's shown here so here's the
elements
up to iron and nickel and then all the
other elements of which there are a lot
more
get built by either the s process
stepping up
in twos or the r process
zigzagging its way up in ones with
occasional deviations as you can see
here that
complicate things when you hit a
particularly
stable number of nuclear particles at
80 and 126 these are so-called magic
numbers
um but they they progress along
different paths and so you get
rather different uh elements from them
and from all of that we've been able to
color in the
periodic table as to where the elements
came from
quite like this diagram we've got the
hydrogen and the helium
in blue as being formed in the
mostly in the big bang
some helium is then formed in stars
a little bit of lithium was formed in
the big bang but not much and that was
all
and then all the other elements you can
see things like
oxygen exploding massive stars so
type 2 supernovae green
these these ones here these are formed
by
type 1a supernovae actually turns out
that
neutron stars merging with each other
is a very powerful source of a lot of
the heavy elements again
a shower of neutrons is just what you
need
to irradiate things and make them
grow bigger and bigger mass wise
by absorbing neutrons using the r
process
and then of course we've got these guys
down here that we've
made in the lab and one or two oddballs
like beryllium
and boron that really
get created mostly by cosmic rays so
rather rare elements
uh oh this slide's gone all wrong look
sorry about that
um i'll skip over that
now
one of the uh mysteries that we have yet
to crack
is what were the very first stars
and the uh population
three stars that would be even older
than the known population two stars
should have no metals at all in them and
should have formed
in that first few hundred million years
after the big bang and lit up the uh
the universe ending the cosmic dark ages
and they would have only contained the
hydrogen and the helium from the big
bang
now we've not found any yet
um now we know that the methuselah star
and uh is a population two star it's got
a little bit of the heavier elements in
it and it must have formed
from the result of the supernovae
explosions
of these hypothetical population three
stars
the uh they would have probably
uh formed and then very giant stars
would have
blown up quite quickly with a short life
of uh
just tens of millions of years and so
it's all
perfectly plausible that the population
2 star like the methuselah star could
have formed from the debris
about 13.2 billion
years ago now we might be able to detect
some of these
if we look at the hubble ultra deep
field image we look deeply enough
into this picture by most of what you're
seeing
in the image are galaxies but we might
be able to appear deep enough
into it to reveal some of the very
earliest
population three stars which might have
formed
not as members of galaxies at all but
independently in space
conditions of course back that early
were rather different things were
rather denser than they are now
and so it was possible for stars to form
much more easily
and we think that they would have been
therefore very large indeed
probably at around 200 solar masses
and they're able to do that also because
not having any of the heavier elements
around particularly no carbon and oxygen
they would be forced to burn only by the
proton proton chain that leads from
hydrogen to helium
and not using the cno
cycle the carbon nitrogen oxygen cycle
which is a
catalytic effect that goes on
in stars today stars like the sun
managed to burn more quickly
because of that now we think
that the
this image here might be the detection
of the very first of the
uh light from those population
three stars the gray blobs are where
uh the they've edited out foreground
objects
so galaxies and other interfering
objects that's done
subtracted those out and the orange and
yellow
glow in the background is the possible
infrared light
from some of these very very early stars
the population three stars the first
stars in the universe
um and of course it's in the infrared
because the universe expanded so much
in the intervening time that the
light has been stretched out from the
visible down into these
longer wavelengths
so the question is
where did the methuselah star come from
and the gaia space
mapping satellite is shedding quite a
lot of
uh information on this and it's
suggesting
that the star is moving so fast as we
mentioned right at the beginning
because it's on a very elliptical orbit
around the milky way
and was probably born in a separate
dwarf galaxy
that then was devoured by the milky way
itself
so it had its origin in a different
galaxy
and more moreover we think that galaxy
merged with the milky way about
10 billion years ago so the sun wouldn't
even have been born yet but the
methuselah star had been burning away
for about three billion years
in this other galaxy already at this
point
and the reason for that is that when we
look
at the hertzsprung russell diagram
for the milky way
and this has been revealed to us by the
exquisite precision of their gaia
satellite
able to make very very high resolution
measurements
of uh distances and brightnesses
we can figure out that the galaxy the
milky way seems to have
two distinct overlapping
main sequence paths to it of different
ages and different metallicities
different compositions
so the main sequence path for a
very ancient galaxy is slightly
uh different to that of
a younger galaxy
because it has had the chance
to go through more generations of stars
for more of the metals the heavy
elements and that enables the
uh stars to burn in a
slightly hotter than they do if they are
metal poor and so the
blue line for the old galaxy
is shifted slightly to the right
towards the higher temperatures for the
same
mass than the orange line for
what we think would be the uh stars from
a slightly
uh less ancient galaxy
so we've got these two parallel lines
we've also got these two different turn
off points
where around about here the
stars from
one of these lines are turning off and
becoming giants
and the other one is turning off at a
slightly different age point and mass
range
and that's shown now today
in the quite distinct two different
classes of stars in two different traces
and again we can
not only classify them by their color
temperature and their brightness but
also on how they're moving as well
and and start to look at their
velocities and try and untangle
whether this is right and whether the
stars
that are in the uh blue line are
actually moving a bit faster
than the stars from the red line and it
looks like they are
so this is quite evidence of a fairly
major merger
in the history of the milky way in that
it wasn't a question of a particularly
large galaxy
necessarily eating a tiny little dwarf
but perhaps more of a
meeting of equals with the milky way
progenitor being
the slightly larger of the two but
nevertheless more of a
overall merger than uh anything else
so i think the study of these very
ancient stars is certainly beginning to
tell us
a lot about the history of
the milky way and even how the milky way
came to grow to be the galaxy it is now
and with that i shall finish thank you
very much for listening to this talk